# Lund _et al,_ 2025
This is a repository for the publication "Functional analysis of variants in cancer genes in carrier genomic background using CRISPR-LOH and CRISPR-Select". The scripts used for SCCG variant calling and quantification in Lund _et al.,_ 2025 are freely available and customisable for alternative experimental designs. For technical support contact either jbc53@cam.ac.uk or casper.lund@bric.ku.dk.

# System requirements
The system requirements including required packages and their versions are outlined sessionInfo_SCCG_quantification.txt and sessionInfo_SCCG_variant_calling.txt. No non-standard headware is required to run the analyses. The analyses were conducted on an MacBook Air 2022, M2 with 16 GB memory on macOS Ventura 13.0.1.

# Installation guide
For package installation guide please refer to https://cran.r-project.org/ for R packages and https://pypi.org/ and https://github.com/MissionBio/ for Python packages. Installation vary depending on connection specification, but should complete in minutes.

# Instructions
The data to reproduce and demo the analysis pipeline are avaiable in this GitHub. The initial variant calling has been performed using MissionBio's GUI, and the .5 outputs are available in `./data`. To reproduce and demo the analysis, download all the files from this GitHub, keeping the folder architecture. In the root directory, make output folders for the Python scripts called `Fig4bc-BRCA2-M192fs-PARP1-F44_-D5-rep1`, `Fig4bc-BRCA2-M192fs-PARP1-F44_-D5-rep2`, `Fig4bc-BRCA2-M192fs-PARP1-F44_-D12-rep1`, `Fig4bc-BRCA2-M192fs-PARP1-F44_-D12-rep2`, and `Extended-Data`. Alternatively, the paths can be changed within the scripts. From here, run the Python scripts to call the variants at a single cell resolutions, followed by running the R scripts to perform the variant quantification. The computational runtime on the specified setup is to be expected at a few minutes. 

While the pipeline is ready out the box to reproduce the data from Lund _et al.,_ 2025, the scripts needs adjustments to your experimental design. Using the Python and R scripts as templates, this is achievable for anyone with moderate coding experience in Python and R. Besides trivial pathing etc. the following things must be edited to fit your experimental setup:
- In the Python script, the amplicon IDs (e.g. `AMPL1023258`) must be changed to fit your amplicon IDs.
- In the R script, the variant combination are quantified sequentially. Using a similar approach, quantify the number of variant combinations of interest by editing the filtering of variant calls (e.g. `chr13:32326553:GAT/G']` to your variant of interest. The amount of possible combinations scale exponentially with the amount of analysed amplicons. We note this apporach is most appropriate to examine the relation between few variants, although valid for any number. How INDELs of interest are identified in an allele-specific amnner is outlined in script and can be used for any variant by providing where the INDEL must being using the same nomenclature (e.g. `chr13:32326558`).
